---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2015-12-21T19:45:11.264Z'
dateModified: '2015-12-21T19:44:32.750Z'
title: The Powell Street Line
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2015-12-21-the-powell-street-line.md
published: true
url: the-powell-street-line/index.html
_type: Article

---
Every night Phil yelled answers at Jeopardy. He waited on the contestants to answer and, before they could, he yelled the answers again. He did not stay tuned for Final Jeopardy because he already knew the answer and didn't care who won. Every night he imagined one of the questions being "Do you really want to live on without her Phil?" "What's the point anymore?" "Who will look after her when you are gone Phil? "Those were the questions he didn't have answers to. Yet, every night he answered them in his own ways. Tonight was an election night so Jeopardy wasn't on. This meant Phil had only those questions to ask himself. "Fucking Alex Trebek" he mumbled to himself. 

He was turning seventy in two weeks and no one had seen the belt to his open pea green robe since he was fifty. He had wild unruly shoulder length hair, which was in it's second malting- this time from grey to white. To this mange he applied copious amounts of Brylecreme. This smell of a barbershop coupled with a lifetime full of Irish Spring soap made Phil one of the most pleasant bus mates in the city. He kept his nails short and his eyebrows long, some of which occasionally distorted his vision. He fastidiously cleaned his wallet out daily. At the end of each purging it contained his Drivers License, his AARP card, a bus Pass, a local library card, and a picture of Gladys. Today there was also the appearance of his voter registration card, which had made its one in one thousand four hundred and sixty day journey into his wallet. 

Like most San Francisco houses, the house across the street from Phil's had a bottom step that started six inches above the sidewalk on one side, and flush with the sidewalk on the other. A shadow danced across Phil's wall catching his attention. In front of the house across the street a man was stepping up and down off the slanted bottom step and looking up the steep hill. As Phil looked up he also became aware of the man's conversation seeping through his open window. He was speaking with a mouth full of honey; in the way alcohol always makes a man's voice smooth and thick. He told whoever was on the other end of the line he could still taste bourbon and that he vaguely remembered somebody mentioning that on his "last night" Whiskey is what he had to drink. The fog was thick so it was hard for Phil to see the man's face but he believed what the man said because there was a drunken bluntness to it. The fog hid things from Phil often but he learned as got older that, like everything, it comes to pass. Tonight was a "three horn night" which meant that fog was covering every neighborhood within earshot. The foghorns repeatedly tensed the city with their drumming. Phil sat breathing deeply and loudly. He felt his breathe synch with the foghorns rhythm. Whenever he did this he felt like part of the city, he would breathe it in and then it would breathe him in- his body only a two-way door to the inner and outer world. He watched as the man slid his phone into his jacket and started to play with a small button pinned to his jacket. 

Phil assumed it was an "I Voted" button with the outline of California on it because he sat spinning his own on the Formica topped kitchen table. To the side of his spinning pin there sat an open cedar box with a worn piece of green felt inside. The dusty smell of the felt balanced perfectly with the clear aroma of the cedar. Pinned carefully to the felt in identical pairs were thirty years worth of "I voted" buttons. Each set of buttons pinned carefully together as an inseparable couple. The buttons stared coldly at Phil and he starred longingly back at them. Each pair told its own story, each row acted like numbers on the clock of life, but the only button with a sad story was the one spinning on the table in front of him. It was a lone ballerina at a party full of waltzing couples. He let the button spin and watched it wobble and teeter and almost stop. He would listen as it petered out like a dying motor then he would twist it again back into life motion. 

He stopped the button spinning with the middle finger that he usually reserved for weak Jeopardy contestants. He pinned the button to the felt, ran his finger down the column of pre-existing pins. Their delicate metallic rattle brought a smile to his face as he closed the box. With this, he shifted his attention again to the man across the street that clumsily paced up and down the hill in front of the house. 

As usual in North Beach, the fog was both caressing and choking the neighborhood. It cloaked everything that was more than a block away. It hid things from sight but brought smells from around the city. Eucalyptus from the Presidio, wafts of chocolate from Ghirardelli Square, and they all poured together through open windows around the city. It gave the city's white veil a distinct smell. Like the perfume of a lover, it is something you can never forget. From where Phil sat tonight the fog was thin enough for him to see a slight wobble, like the button's, in the man's steps. In the background the foghorns kept booming, metering out the night like an unseen bass drummer keeping the city of drunken dancers in rhythm. 

"Damn kids again!" Phil said to Gladys, who had been dead for almost 2 years. He didn't pause for a response. "Did you see these results? Obama won the election. They just called it. Finally this country has some God damn sense again." Even if she were alive she wouldn't have answered him. Not only did she despise his inappropriate outbursts but she had also been a republican. 

He shook his head, swept his hair behind his ear, and stood. He placed the voter registration and the cedar box into a drawer in the kitchen where he kept them and slowly closed it. He grabbed the New York Times from the counter, its pages rustling under his clumsy and powerful grip. Despite his age, everyday he would walk a hilly San Francisco mile for the Times and was still sharp enough to finish the Crossword. He always did the Crossword first often sitting in Washington Square Park. This habit was born because Gladys didn't see the point in the crossword. 

"If you know the answers Phil, why write them down?" she would ask. But he knew she loved to watch him smile every time he finished the puzzle. As his writing quickened, she would peer over her section of the Times and watch him grin as he penned in the final answers. He would quickly look up and wink at her as he penned in the last answer. After that she would always roll her eyes back into her own reading. 

A foghorn bellowed. Phil abruptly shook his head and returned to peering out of his bay windows at the man. His gaze panned directly over the cedar box, a mound of polychromatic pills, and it's accompanying glass of tap water. The deep boom of the closest foghorn slammed again into the city jarring the man outside Phil's window. It shifted the direction the drunken man paced in front of the neighbors house. Phil smirked as he watched, remembering the time in his own life when he too lived in spurts of impulse interrupted by the foghorn. He watched the man outside sit down, stand up, and rummage through his soaked hair. Phil's grinned widened, realizing this is what young men do when they are nervous about meeting a woman, they writhe with awkwardness. He heard Jeopardy again in his head. "What is the thing that makes young men the most nervous Alex?" he said aloud. 

Despite his sharp vision, it was hard for Phil to see the man on account of the fog. Even if he had been able to see, Phil doubted he would have recognized him. There was constant traffic in front of the house across the street and the faces all ran together. That and the foghorns were the only things that hadn't changed in this neighborhood. The foot traffic at 1833 Taylor Street had always been chaotic and intoxicating. For fifty years Phil watched people do everything imaginable on that porch. He used to patiently stand on the sidewalk in front of the house while Gladys interacted with anyone in the neighborhood that would listen. He would wait patiently on her answering trivia in his head, whistling show tunes, or smelling any fresh spices she had bought. 

One day, before she died, Gladys had fallen on outside while he was out for the Times. Phil had come home to an empty house, something to this day he still hates. On the table beside an unpacked bag of groceries was a note. Written in unfamiliar handwriting it said his wife had fallen on the steps out front and she had been taken to the hospital by the neighbor. When Phil got to the hospital he smiled curtly at the neighbor as he took Gladys's hand and pulled a squeaking chair close to her bed. As Phil looked across Gladys' body, for a blink he realized how much the girl looked like a younger version of his wife. This was something from that day on Phil never forgot. The doctors set her leg, put her in an air cast, and informed them both that Gladys blood work showed signs of advanced Leukemia. The coldness and severity of that fact hammered on both immediately. When they left later in the day, she had a cast but he looked 5 years older. 

Some month's later at Gladys's funeral the face of the neighbor stood out around the grave like a designer dress at a thrift store. Her blonde hair was radiant against the leathered and grey faces of everyone else. He noticed again how much she looked like a young Gladys and that thought alone got him through the service. Since that day, she was the only person Phil spoke to. He always stopped to talk with her or tapped his hound's-tooth ivy cap with a finger if she wasn't alone. 

After he noticed the similarity, he grew more comfortable around the young woman. Placing her beside his memories of Gladys he came to understand her body language, gestures, and life so well. It drove him to stand watch from his kitchen over her apartment whenever life wasn't in the way. 

Due to a lifetime of ignoring it, Phil thought himself immune to the foghorn but noticed today how each time it rang, it jerked the man across the street around like an untethered puppet. Phil sat behind his window, a sentry, trying to make out the face of the man through the cotton like mist. He watched the man stand up again, sit down again, and quickly shuffle his feet. 

"He is as nervous as a long tail cat in a room full of rocking chairs," he said to Gladys. 

As he said that, the fog thinned and Phil surprisingly remembered the face he now saw. The last time he saw the young man he had been standing on the porch talking through a half open door to the blonde neighbor. During the conversation, the door was closed in his face gently but firmly. Not an exclamation point but a period. Phil remembered because the deep thud rattled loose the pane of one of his windows. After that night, the next few times Phil saw the blonde she was polite but short. She would shoot him pursed lip grins of anguish, lower her head, and walk by. Phil bought her tulips, Gladys' favorite, but decided not give them to her- although he couldn't remember why. "What are Lilioideae Tulipa Alex?" He remembered saying that as he put the tulips in an old coffee pot but over time they wilted with neglect into rotten potpourri. That was almost three months ago Phil thought. 

"So why is he back tonight?" This time Phil said it to himself. He really didn't care, but he didn't want to see forced smiles on the girl's face again. They reminded him too much of Gladys's face when she would lie about there being no pain even though he knew the cancer was torturing her. 

"Take your pills every night and see this through without me." Those were her last words to him. Phil begrudgingly eyed his pills as he remembered those sentimental instructions. He didn't know the pieces of this medicinal jigsaw by name but he knew they all fit together to keep him alive. He heard Trebek in his headDo you really want to live on without her Phil? What's the point anymore Phil? 

The foghorn groaned and Phil again shook his head and looked up. He had to tighten his gaze because the fog had thickened again. As he did, the man tightened and shifted his weight with a purpose. Phil could tell by the way man shifted his movements from clumsy to silky that the blonde would soon be in view. And then, there she was. Clumsily bounding the hill with one jacket collar up. The collar was equally to blame on the weather, her general demeanor, and her drunkenness. 

The couple embraced tightly. Phil couldn't hear what the woman was saying but he heard the man answer that he was ready. Phil could see the blonde woman's shoulders quivering and knew that she was crying into the man's waterproof jacket. The fog thinned enough for Phil to see a grin sweep onto the man's face. He wasn't sure, but as a betting man Phil would have pegged it for a grin of relief. 

Phil caught himself crying and smiling as he stood there. He spat out "does that answer your question Trebek? Shit." He clumsily wiped his eyes, and carried on watching as the couple stood tangled on the hill. After they went inside he lingered another minute until the foghorn beckoned him to move. He cleared his throat, swore again, and took off his robe. He pulled a sweater over his torso, found his pants, shoes and keys. He paused to look at the pills before scooping them off the table and forcing them down with the water. 

He walked determinedly out of his house and to the bodega two blocks away. As the foghorns bellowed their cadence, Phil worked in rhythm to it. He gathered his items and paid the storekeeper in cash. The small man behind the counter half-heartedly said thank you, knowing Phil wouldn't respond. Phil put a dollar on the counter, winked and said, "You're welcome". 

He floated through the night, seemingly riding the fog. His steps were inaudible as he climbed the porch of the neighbor's house. He bent over and placed the tulips gently at the door of the house, he stood up and looked at the flowers. They were beaming through the dark night. Phil's grin widened as he smoothly walked down the steps. By the time he hit the bottom step, the fog became an impenetrable curtain, but as it wafted into the night it now carried the smell of the tulips from the porch